Secondary storage is a type of memory that can hold data for long periods of time even when there is no power to the computer. Programs are normally stored in secondary memory and loaded into main memory as needed. Important data, such as word processing documents, payroll data, and inventory figures, is saved to secondary storage as well.

The most common type of secondary storage device is the disk drive. A traditional disk drive stores data by magnetically encoding it onto a spinning circular disk. Solid state drives, which store data in solid state memory, are increasingly becoming popular. A solid state drive has no moving parts and operates faster than a traditional disk drive. Most computers have some sort of secondary storage device, either a traditional disk drive or a solid state drive, mounted insided their case. External drives are also available that connect to one of the computer's communication ports. External drives can be used to create backup copies of important data, or to move data to another computer.

USB (Universal Serial Bus) drives are also used to copying data and moving it to other computers. They plug into the computer's USB port and appear to the system as a disk drive. These drives do not actually contain a disk, however. They store data in a special type of memory known as flash memory.

Optical devices such as the CD (compact disc) and the DVD (digital versatile disc) are also used for data storage. Data is not recorded magnetically on an optical disc, but is encoded as a series of pits on the disc surface. CD and DVD drives use a laser to detect the pits and thus read the encoded data. Optical discs hold large amount of data, and because recordable CD and DVD drives are now commonplace, they make a good medium for creating backup copies of data.

